[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: This is how
it goes for millions of people.
You're smart.
You're capable, yet when
you wake up each morning,
you have a sense of dread, fear,
or even panic to begin the day.
There's no rational reason
for these terrible feelings
to have taken root.
This is the key.
No logical reason
means that you likely
have a problem that is either
lifestyle or biochemically
based.
Today's guest, Trudy
Scott, has written
a book titled "The
Anti-Anxiety Food Solution."
Trudy is here to tell us that
a good deal of our anxiety
can be easily managed by some
simple changes in lifestyle,
diet, and supplementation
often eliminating the need
to turn to pharmaceuticals.
And wow, this is
really good news
for an awful lot of people.
And you have changed
the lives of how many?
hundreds, thousands
of people by now?
>>TRUDY SCOTT:
Thousands of people.
>>REGINA: Thousands.
And you lecture all over.
So here we are.
>>SCOTT: It's so
great to be here.
Thanks for having me.
And it's so wonderful to
be able to go out and share
this information because
so many people don't
make this powerful connection
between what we eat
and how we feel.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: And I'm on a mission
to share that information.
And there's so much research
supporting it, that we really
need to make it
mainstream, really do.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
When you look at the
percentages of people
that are on mood altering
pharmaceuticals right now
that have some really
truly awful side effects,
it seems like it's time for this
message to be taken seriously.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
We need to go back to basics.
We need to eat like
our grandparents ate
or our great grandparents
in some cases.
But we just need to go back
to basics and eat real food,
and then also eat food that
suits our own biochemistry.
Because we're all unique.
Some people may have
a problem of gluten.
Someone else may have a
problem with caffeine.
So we need to figure
out what the issue is
that is causing your anxiety.
>>REGINA: And that's
a real key here
because some people, some
of you listening to this,
will not like some
of the information.
But you have to remember,
this show is specifically
ordered toward mood, mood
conditions and disorders,
depression, anxiety, et cetera.
So even though some
of what you're saying
will not be welcome news for
people at large, especially
when we start talking
about things like caffeine,
again, this is very
specific if you
want to take care of this
one particular issue.
And of course, we
always have the choice
to just keep eating
a trash diet,
doing things that are not
compatible with our body,
and then just throwing
a drug after it.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: But there's
a price to pay.
>>SCOTT: Right.
And so many people
just tolerate that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>SCOTT: The other
thing that I really
want to get through
to all my clients
is don't just
tolerate feeling bad.
You know, some people
have felt so bad
for so long they don't remember
what it felt like to feel good.
One of my clients
actually came to see me
because she wanted
to you lose weight.
And she had just been
diagnosed with diabetes,
and she needed some energy.
And she filled in
the questionnaire
that I have my clients do.
And she's had worry
as a 10, anxiety
as an 8, perfectionism,
controlling,
all of these, depression.
And I said, do you
realize this is
what I can actually
help you with.
And she said, no, I didn't think
you could because just like
my eyes are blue, and I can't
change the color of my eyes,
I can't change my nature.
I've been like
this my whole life.
So that's one part,
people just being
like that their whole lives
and not even realizing it.
>>REGINA: They've accepted it.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
But there's the other issue
where people are getting older,
maybe a woman going
into menopause.
And they just think,
well, it's normal.
My mom had it.
My grandmother had it.
I've got it.
I just have to put up with it.
And we don't have to.
We can actually change it.
And using food and nutrients
are just so powerful.
>>REGINA: Well, let's
do a little backstory.
Because you're a very
sportif, you know, person.
You're involved in mountain
climbing and hiking and skiing
and all kinds of
wonderful things.
And you have been
throughout your life.
You and your husband
are from South Africa,
which is why your
cute little accent--
>>SCOTT: Thank you.
>>REGINA: We find it very
endearing and charming here.
Yet, you still were suffering
to a very large extent from some
of these very disorders
we're talking about.
And maybe you can
give us an idea
of what your life was
like before you decided
to take control of it yourself.
>>SCOTT: Well, as you
said, I'm a sporty person.
I'm an adventurer.
I've done some crazy things
on rock faces, you know,
sleeping on a portaledge on
the side of the cliff face.
And we actually met
in the mountains.
And we got married
and had our honeymoon
on top of Mount Kilimanjaro.
So I've done some very
adventurous things.
And I wouldn't consider
myself timid or anxious.
But in my late 30s I started
to get increasingly anxious
for no reason at all.
I would just wake with this
pounding heart, this sort
of fear of everything,
a sense of doom.
And I clearly remember
my first panic attack.
I had come back from work.
I was actually working
in corporate America
at the time in a computer job.
And we'd been for
a nice bike ride.
And we were talking about work.
And this panic
attack just hit me.
And I was hyperventilating.
I said, I can't breathe,
I can't breathe.
I had the clammy skin.
And I get goosebumps
when I talk about this.
Because it was so terrifying.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: And I really
thought I was going to die.
It was just so, so scary.
And that galvanized
me into thinking
there's got to be something
that I've got to do about it now
because I'd had
the panic attack.
But with my bringing
in South Africa
and eating real whole food and
not going to the doctor a lot,
I didn't even think
about medication.
And I worked with a
nurse practitioner
and naturopathic physician
and started to find solutions.
And the more I dug, the
more interest that I
got and eventually
went back to school
to study to become
a nutritionist.
And this has become
my life work,
to show other people
that they can totally
eliminate their anxiety
and panic attacks.
And I don't have
any more anxiety.
I had three panic attacks
total and no more.
And I feel great.
You know, when I was
really anxious as well
during that time,
there's no way I
could have gone and
some something like this
or gone up in front of a hundred
people at a presentation.
And now, I'm cool and
calm and collected.
>>REGINA: Thank goodness.
It would have been
difficult for me,
too, with you
hyperventilating and sweating.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: So you also
studied with someone
who is also well-known
in this field
and had just a beautiful
apprenticeship,
it sounds like, for a couple
years with her as well.
Maybe you can talk a
little bit about what
she did as a bit
of your backstory.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
So when I actually
finished my studying
and I decided that this was the
area that I wanted to focus on,
I wanted to work with
some really great people.
And Julia Ross is the
author of "The Mood Cure."
And I worked in her clinic for
two years after I graduated.
And she's just a pioneer
in the use of amino acids
and using biochemistry
and food and a whole bunch
of other things that actually
help people feel great.
And working with her,
and learning from her,
and working with all the clients
that came into the clinic
was absolutely fantastic.
And there are a
lot of great people
who do a lot of this work.
And what I wanted to
do when I wrote my book
was pull all the
information from all
these other great
practitioners who
had been using
different parts of it.
And her expertise are the amino
acids, which are miracles.
They really are miracles--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: --for ending anxiety
and stopping sugar cravings
as well.
>>REGINA: Well, we're
going to talk about that
more toward the end of the show.
Let's get into some of the
conditions, symptomologies,
some of the stats.
We're going to go into the
flow of some of the foods that
are really helpful in
reversing those conditions.
And then finally,
we'll go into some
of the supplementation
and that big juicy bit
you just talked
about, amino acids.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: So first
of all, give us
a little bit of an idea
about the rise of anxiety
and depression in society.
I know the stats are pretty
astounding in a negative way.
>>SCOTT: So about 18% of
the population in the US
has some kind of
anxiety disorder,
be it panic, or social
anxiety, or generalized
anxiety disorder.
And I think the numbers
are even higher.
Because people who
don't go to the doctor
are not being counted.
>>REGINA: Well, I was
going to ask that.
That's only those who
have been diagnosed.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: What
about a person who
A, the kind that has a sense
of perfection, I can do it all?
Those aren't people who
normally would go to the doctor.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>REGINA: If they're not
feeling right, they're like,
something's wrong with me.
I have to find a way to fix it.
You must see a lot of people
like that in your clientele.
>>SCOTT: A lot of people, yes.
>>REGINA: So then if you're
looking at real numbers,
we might be looking at
something more like one
in four instead of one in five.
>>SCOTT: That's very possible.
And the numbers are increasing.
And we see higher numbers
in the Western countries,
where we're eating the standard
American diet, the junk food
diet.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>SCOTT: And we're seeing
the numbers increasing.
And the other thing is with the
numbers that are increasing,
we do see women being affected
at twice the rate of men.
>>REGINA: Why is that?
>>SCOTT: It's a
number of factors.
One thing is that-- I
work mostly with women.
I do work with men as well,
but I work mostly with women.
And most of my
clients, you know,
they're taking care
of their families.
They're working a busy job.
So we, as women,
we're care takers.
And we take less
care of ourselves.
That might be one factor.
Another factor is
the hormonal aspect.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So we've got hormones
changing throughout our lives.
And then a third aspect
is actually serotonin.
And serotonin we often
associate with depression.
But people with low
serotonin can also
have anxiety in the head, the
ruminating thoughts, the worry
in the head.
And women make less
serotonin than men.
>>REGINA: Right.
I've read about
that study before.
And that's for a
variety of reasons
that are deeply
societal, you might even
say passed-on genetics and such,
about the condition that women
have lived under for
the last thousand
or several thousand
years of course.
There's a lesser
sense of control,
which does create a low
level anxiety within being.
So men, too,
though, a lot of men
have a lot of these disorders,
but oftentimes won't
go get help.
Or they'll just pop a beer.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
That's exactly it.
I think the fact that we're
seeing more women with anxiety,
we think it's double--
there may actually
be more men that we
don't know about.
And I'm actually working with
a gentleman at the moment,
and he's a big construction guy.
And he says he was embarrassed
to tell people he was anxious.
And since he's been
working with me,
he's been opening
up in his church
and with some of his
colleagues saying he's anxious.
And more of his
friends are telling him
that they're anxious, too.
And now he said, I want to make
this my life work to draw this
out of men, so they'll
actually go and seek help.
>>REGINA: Oh, wow.
That's fabulous.
>>SCOTT: So you might be right.
Maybe men are anxious,
and they're not actually
admitting to it.
And men tend to be
under-reporters often.
I find when I'm
working with men,
they will often
under-report their symptoms.
Whereas, women will say
exactly how they feel.
So anxiety isn't just
a matter of feeling
jittery and anxious
about what's going
to happen to yourself,
your day, your future.
It actually has physical
repercussions as well.
Can you talk about
having persistent anxiety
and what it does to the body?
>>SCOTT: Well, we need to
really take it seriously
because it puts a huge
strain on the heart.
And this is another reason why
I want people to not just put up
with it and tolerate it.
There's now research showing
that the more anxious
you are, the more stressed
you are, the more at risk
you are for heart
disease and stroke.
So it raises cortisol levels.
It actually can
increase blood clotting.
It messes up your
basic hormone balance.
So we do need to take it
seriously and do something
about it and not wait till
we have a panic attack.
Do something before
it gets to that.
And this is, again, this
is hidden a lot of times.
A lot of people you would think,
oh, they have it all together.
You would never
guess that anything
might be going on underneath it.
Their girlfriends look
up to them and so forth.
And oftentimes, those
are the very people
that are having the issues.
Those who have this sense
of perfection and drive
are some of the
most often affected.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
They deal with it.
They cover it up.
And they just pretend
that everything's OK,
whereas they're not
really feeling so great.
>>REGINA: So there's one
saying in your book, which
I think some people have heard
already, which is Hippocrates'
saying, "let food
be your medicine
and medicine be your food."
And yet, we've gotten
completely away from that.
And we don't need to go
into the reasons why.
I've done quite a
few shows with people
on how the pharmaceutical
industry made its inroads
and how food started taking a
back seat to pharmaceuticals
in terms of all of
our health care.
So now, let's talk about some
specific things about brain
chemistry itself
and mood disorders.
What are some of
the chemicals that
are most often
involved in anxiety,
and then also the same
thing with depression?
And how do you differentiate
between those clients?
And does one often
lead to the other?
>>SCOTT: Well, as I
mentioned earlier,
serotonin is a big factor.
So if you've got low serotonin,
you can feel depressed,
and you can feel anxious.
And it's often
the anxiety that's
in the head, where you've
got the ruminating thought.
Then low gaba-- gaba's
another neurotransmitter,
gamma-Aminobutric acid.
It's also an amino acid.
And if your gaba
levels are low, you're
going to feel stiff
and tense and anxious
in your body, a physical
kind of anxiety.
And often people will have
a combination of both.
So we have to
figure out, if we're
doing the supplements,
which supplement to use.
But certainly when
it comes to food,
eating protein is going to give
them all the amino acids, which
is going to start
to help them make
their own neurotransmitters.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK, so that's part
of the discussion
some people are really
uncomfortable with.
I mean, especially people who've
been trying to read the latest
books on health and diet
and the latest trends.
And maybe they've
gone from carnivore
to vegetarian to vegan to raw.
I mean, that seems to be a
pretty common progression
that's happened.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: And not
only are they not
feeling better, but
maybe even worse.
And so now we talk
about proteins,
you mentioned a moment ago.
There are very specific proteins
and qualities of proteins
that you see people
benefiting from.
Let's talk about it.
>>SCOTT: I'm glad you
brought up this topic.
Because it is a touchy subject.
And when I was having all my
health problems and my anxiety,
I was actually a vegetarian.
And it did not suit me.
I was eating a lot of soy,
which was not a good thing.
I was eating a lot of processed
soy, soy yogurt, soy cheese,
you know, everything soy.
So that was a problem.
And soy is a common
food allergen.
But I just made the
decision that adding back
in some protein was something
that I needed to do.
And a lot of my clients
find that when they've
become vegetarians
they have issues.
When they start to add
the protein back in,
they start to feel better.
And I'm a big
proponent of red meat.
But the big thing is quality.
It needs to be good
quality, grass-fed red meat.
And that makes a
world of difference.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>SCOTT: The
omega-3s are higher.
The omega-6s are lower.
They've got all
these antioxidants.
It's got betacarotene.
And it's got all these
amazing amino acids,
which help to make
brain chemicals.
It's also got iron, which is
a cofactor in making the brain
chemicals.
It's also got zinc.
>>REGINA: A cofactor?
>>SCOTT: A cofactor to help
make serotonin and gaba.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SCOTT: It's got zinc, which
is so important for anxiety.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
Yes.
>>SCOTT: Zinc and copper
balance each other out.
And if you've got very high
copper levels and low zinc
levels, you're going
to feel more anxious.
And then if you take zinc or
you eat food that has zinc,
then your copper's
going to come down.
And you're going to
end up more balanced.
And then you're not
going to feel anxious.
And there is this social
anxiety condition,
which we'll probably talk
about later, called pyroluria.
And zinc is one of
the key nutrients.
So as well as making the brain
chemical serotonin and gaba
and some of the others, it's
really, really important
for this pyroluria
condition, which
is a social anxiety condition.
But there's a lot of
research supporting
this connection between
red meat and mood.
There's actually some research
that came out of Australia,
a number of papers
by a physician
called Dr. Felice Jacka.
And she saw a correlation
between a whole foods
diet that included red meat
and a lower risk of anxiety
and depression in women.
And the big thing is that the
study came out from Australia.
And the quality of
meat in Australia
is very different from
the quality of meat here.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: So we know that
any papers coming out
of Australia talking
about red meat,
it's very likely to
be grass-fed red meat.
>>REGINA: Well, I relate to
that completely because I
was a vegetarian for 18 years.
And I mean, I really
threw myself into it.
And I had a television show
that aired throughout the United
States, on every PBS station
but one-- New Orleans,
not going to give up sausage--
and Australia, Canada.
And so that was
part of my identity
was this whole
vegetarian way of life.
But what started happening
by about, I'd say,
the 10th or 12th
year, I would salivate
driving by a Sizzler steak
billboard on the highway.
I mean, I though something's
really wrong here.
And of course, because
I was a vegetarian
for philosophical purposes,
which in my heart I still am,
it was very difficult.
I allowed my health
to really decline
before I would even
consider taking a bite.
And then I had this
interesting experience,
where I was really
not feeling well.
But this time I
was feeling weak.
I had a meditation.
And it showed me a piece of
red meat and wine, red wine.
So I thought no, no, no.
I went to a doctor in
Sacramento, who was well known
at the time, because he
also was highly intuitive,
a British gentleman, older man.
And first thing he says
is, well, what I'm hearing
is you need to start
eating red meat.
Oh, no.
And I cried all over
the first steak.
But I felt better immediately.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>REGINA: I mean, it was
hard psychologically.
And I know there are
other people that
might have to deal with
this or might choose to.
>>SCOTT: And they need to think
about how they're feeling.
You know, I worked
with one woman
who worked with me a number
of years ago and was a vegan.
And I encouraged her to
at least add some eggs in.
Because eggs are a
good source of protein.
She was not willing to do
the red meat or the chicken.
And she tried a
little bit, but wasn't
able to actually follow through.
And she stopped working with me.
Then I bumped into her
at a conference recently.
And she said, Trudy,
I feel so terrible.
I'm ready to do
whatever you tell me.
Whatever you tell me
I need to do, I'll do.
She came to work with me.
And within a month, she
had added back eggs.
She had added back
some pastured chicken,
which is chicken that are
running around in the pastures.
>>REGINA: Yes, free range.
>>SCOTT: And she was
feeling so much better.
And then she went to a
conference, a vegan conference.
She stopped it all.
And now she's feeling
terrible again.
So she's just got to get to
the point that she's saying--
>>REGINA: Psychologically.
>>SCOTT: --I'm ready
to do this for myself.
>>REGINA: This is
a really big issue.
When we look at
priorities, we have
our philosophical viewpoints,
our spiritual viewpoints.
But in the end,
what I came to is
none of that is going
to be worth much
if I'm no longer
occupying this body
because I have
allowed myself to fall
into such a state of ill health.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>REGINA: And so for me, the
decision became it's worth it.
It's worth it to go back.
It doesn't mean I don't have
compassion for the animals
and have the same questions.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And so this is big.
>>SCOTT: And then also, if
you are making a choice where
you know the farmer, or you know
where the food is coming from,
and you know that
it's grass-fed,
and the animals are
humanely treated,
that makes a difference, too.
>>REGINA: And that's not
hard to find anymore.
>>SCOTT: No, it's not.
>>REGINA: You can find this.
And another element
of this is liver.
We talked about this off camera.
And I think, uh, liver.
Yeah, I hated the
way mom made it.
I can't stand the flavor of it.
But in fact, there are easy
ways to get liver into the diet.
>>SCOTT: And liver is wonderful.
It is so nutrient dense.
Again, quality's important.
So you do need to get it
from good quality animals.
But it is high in the B
vitamins, B12, for example.
And it's so nutrient dense.
Chicken livers are great.
In South Africa, a
standard starter option
on a menu in a restaurant
is peri peri chicken livers,
which is like curried
chicken livers.
And that's something that
people eat regularly.
And it's healthy.
And then something like
a liverwurst is great.
>>REGINA: Yeah, liverwurst.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And you can even
go to Trader Joe's and get
a lovely chicken
and truffle pate.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: You know,
something like that.
So there are ways to start
getting those dense nutrients
back in the body if you've
already crossed that border,
and you're going into
the red meat world.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: But also, let's talk
about fish, wild caught fish,
and what that brings.
>>SCOTT: So it brings
all the omega-3s.
It gives you protein as well, a
good source of vitamin D. A lot
of people with mood
problems have low vitamin D.
But again, quality's
important, wild fish.
Fish that is farmed
has been colored.
They've added colors
to the food to make
this this nice
bright pink color.
>>REGINA: Including the salmon?
>>SCOTT: Yes.
We don't want to be eating that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: You know, the fish
farmer gets this little color
wheel and says, which color
pink do I want my fish to be?
And then you're ingesting that.
They're given
hormones, antibiotics.
And there's actually
research showing
a connection between farmed
fish and an increased
risk of diabetes.
So farmed fish is
not a good option.
So we want to be going
with the wild fish.
And the smaller fish is better.
Coming from South Africa,
I'm a big fan of sardines.
Sardines contain
all the omega-3s.
They're nice small fish, so
they don't have all the toxins.
And they're just delicious
and easy to take.
Whenever I'm on the road, I
take a few cans of sardines.
If I'm stuck in the
airport somewhere,
I can open a can of
sardines and I've
got a great source of protein.
>>REGINA: That's a good idea.
And I take that
precaution even with tuna
in that there is a particular
fisherman that I know
of in Oregon who goes out
and does his own catches.
And he's very specific
about the size and the age.
Because the older, of
course, the more toxins
they've been ingesting.
And so, again,
this is available.
You can find consciously
raised almost everything.
Maybe you can tell
us right now, do you
know a good website
in general for looking
at how food is raised?
Or should we just do our
own Google search on that?
>>SCOTT: Weston A. Price--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
Weston Price, fabulous.
>>SCOTT: --is a good resource.
>>REGINA: OK.
That's a good resource
for a lot of things.
So OK, Western A Price,
good place to go.
What about gluten?
We're going to start going
through these food options.
Because gluten has turned
out to be a really big one
when it comes to mood.
>>SCOTT: It really is.
And people do not
realize how big it is.
And the fact that
it's in the news,
and there's definitely more
awareness, and a lot of people
are going gluten-free
is really great.
But a lot of people aren't
making this connection
between mood and gluten.
And there's so much
research supporting people
with celiac disease having
high rates of depression,
having more anxiety,
having more social anxiety.
There's even a link between
gluten and bipolar disorder--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: --and gluten
and schizophrenia.
So with my clientele,
and obviously
it's mostly women with anxiety
and depression, at least 80%
do better on a gluten-free diet.
So it's way higher than
a lot of people realize.
The tricky thing is with
gluten, it's difficult to test.
Often people will
go to the doctor.
They'll have a celiac test done.
And the results
come back negative.
And that doctor will say
you can eat gluten again,
but when they actually do
the elimination-- which
is what I have my clients
do, remove the gluten,
see how they feel, and
then add it back in-- then
they really feel the difference.
And the great thing is there's
a lot of research now coming out
in the last year,
the last two years,
supporting this connection.
And most of the
research up till now
has talked about celiac disease
and these mood disorders.
But there is now
research showing
that there's this term
called gluten sensitivity--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: --which I've
known about in my world
for many, many years.
But it's now recognized
in the medical community
as being a disease and that
we need to take it seriously,
and that a lot of
the same symptoms
that people have
with celiac disease,
they might also have when
they've got gluten sensitivity.
And they may not show up
positive on celiac disease
tests.
>>REGINA: And there are
different kinds of tests.
You can also do saliva
tests over a 24 hour period.
And they'll give you a
certain result as well.
But the reality is
empirical evidence
is better than any other.
If you take it away
and you feel better,
that counts more than all
the lab tests in the world.
>>SCOTT: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: But still, we give
our power away to these tests.
Say, well, maybe it
was some other factor.
And again, that's
something-- well,
I just said it-- where we have
been giving our power away
to the medical industry and
those tests for a long time.
>>SCOTT: Yup.
>>REGINA: And you're
saying don't do that.
You have to try and see
how your body's responding.
>>SCOTT: I have all my
clients do this elimination
and then challenge.
And we also do testing.
And sometimes the testing
comes back positive,
sometimes it doesn't.
I just say, don't just
rely on the testing.
So remove the gluten for two
full weeks, no gluten at all.
And I encourage my clients
to eat real whole food
during that period.
Don't eat out at the restaurant.
Don't buy anything in a box.
Eat real whole food.
And then add it
back in on day 15.
And when it's been out of your
body for that length of time,
and then you add it back in, you
can have all kind of reaction.
You can have a
total panic attack.
You could feel depressed.
You could feel wiped
out and exhausted.
You may have aches and pains.
For some people,
it's very profound.
They notice it immediately
they take it out.
And they have a
very profound effect
when they add it back in.
In fact, some people don't
even want to add it back in.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: Because they feel so
good when they're off of it.
But then others,
it's more subtle.
And then when they add it back
in, they have this huge effect.
And then they know that they
really need to stay off it.
>>REGINA: Well, now
what about the notion
of grains in general.
Because now there's
also attention
on more of a paleo diet,
which is a lot of vegetables
and healthy meats, and
that sort of thing.
And the book "Wheat Belly,"
that William Davis wrote,
he's saying that really
it's grains in general,
we're overconsuming
grains in general.
It's not just that it's gluten.
What is your feeling on that?
>>SCOTT: Well, going back
to what I said earlier
about the whole
biochemical individuality,
I work with four different
diets with my clients.
And the first one
is gluten free.
So gluten, definitely
out of the picture.
And we want to see
if that's a problem.
The next aspect is gluten
free and dairy free.
Because often people
with gluten problems
may have problems
with dairy as well.
And then the third
one is all grains.
So this would be the
paleo diet, where
all grains, legumes, starchy
vegetables are removed.
And some people do really well
on that diet, maybe long term.
Some people, it's just
a short term thing.
>>REGINA: Do you determine
that with them beforehand?
Or do they go
through that process?
>>SCOTT: They go
through that process.
As we're working
with them, as they--
I have a six week program.
So as people are coming
in on a weekly basis,
we're checking in.
And we're seeing how
they're responding,
how much better they're doing.
And then we'll add more
elements to the program
if we need to do that.
Some people, it's just
the removal of gluten,
and that's enough.
Others, we need to
do more if we're not
getting the results
that we would expect.
>>REGINA: Though you're doing
this for mood disorders,
is there often a
weight implication?
>>SCOTT: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So oftentimes,
the weight just
starts dropping
away once they hit
on their ideal dietary program?
>>SCOTT: Yes, for a
number of reasons.
Firstly, if you're eating a
food that you're intolerant to,
that's going to
cause inflammation.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: And inflammation will
make you hold onto weight.
It also stressed your adrenals.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: And having good adrenal
function is really important.
If you've got
stressed out adrenals,
you're just going to
hold onto that weight.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: So part of
the program is also
looking at people's
adrenal function
and getting their
adrenals healed.
And everyone's got
burned out adrenals.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
That's really key.
But let's talk about autism
and food for a moment.
>>SCOTT: You know, gluten can
affect any part of the body
and can cause any
symptom, and just
like what we were saying earlier
about this whole biochemical
individuality, someone may end
up with anxiety and depression,
someone else may
end up with autism.
There are other factors
obviously with autism.
There's digestive issues.
And also, there's this tie
over with digestion with mood.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: There's
also heavy metals,
which are often a big
component with autism.
And actually, before
I wrote my book,
I did some research
with a nutritionist
whose focus is
nutrition and autism.
And when I was helping her with
the research for her book--
her book's called
"Nourishing Hope,"
she's Julie Matthews--
we found so many overlaps
between mental
health and autism,
which is very fascinating.
So we can make
changes in one area
and see ramifications in
many different diseases.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
And this also, you
just mentioned.
In digestive health, we're
talking another subject, leaky
gut.
This is turning out to
be a serious issue when
it comes to all of these
different allergies that
are popping up in
people's tests,
where previously you
had no allergies.
Now, you're allergic to
everything, the whole spectrum,
which is usually gluten, soy,
eggs, dairy, sometimes caffeine
as well.
What is leaky gut?
And what's the problem here?
And how can we start improving
that situation with diet?
>>SCOTT: So leaky
gut means you've
got gaps in the gut lining.
And then proteins
from the food that you
ingest get into
the blood system.
And the blood system
says, whoa, what's this?
There's this foreign body here.
Let me create antibodies to it.
So often, when you do that
food intolerance testing,
you might see 30 or
40 different foods
that you have an issue with.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: And it may
be a temporary thing,
until you heal the gut.
So the solution is is
to remove the foods that
are causing the problem
and do some things that
start to heal the gut,
like vitamin C, aloe vera,
glutamine, which is fabulous
for healing the gut.
>>REGINA: OK.
I'm writing these down.
>>SCOTT: And then
when you heal the gut,
then you can slowly
but surely start
to reintroduce some foods.
And you mentioned the
common food allergens.
So those you would want
to obviously add in later.
But if someone's
showing that they've
got an issue with green
beans and peas and salmon,
you would probably think,
well, that maybe is just
because of the leaky gut.
Those are not common
food allergens.
Then they add them back in,
and they see how they react.
>>REGINA: Right.
A friend of mine,
Udo Erasmus, wrote
the book, "Fats That
Heal, Fats That Kill."
And I remember his
saying in the book
that leaky gut was very
strongly impacted by the intake
of the proper essential fatty
acids, such as omega-3 as well.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
So you've got to have
good omega-3s that
are going to coat the lining,
protect the digestive system,
and also help the integrity
of the cell lining,
so you're not going
to have that problem.
The other things that actually
contribute to leaky gut
is possibly genetically
modified food,
stress is a huge factor,
environmental toxins.
All of these things are
onslaughts on the body
and are going to cause problems.
But the biggest thing
that I find is gluten.
If someone has a gluten
issue, it's damaging the gut.
>>REGINA: It's going to simulate
that condition of leaky gut.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
It's going to damage the gut.
It's going to affect
nutrient absorption.
It's going to cause these
other food intolerances.
So removing that, addressing
the other food intolerances,
and then slowly but
surely adding them back,
a lot of people can then start
to eat a normal diet again.
>>REGINA: So is it fair
to say that if you're
over the age of 30
or even 40, you've
been on the planet
and eating foods
and exposed to a lot
of toxins for a while,
and you're starting to find
that you're suddenly sensitive
to or allergic to a whole array
of things, leaky gut is likely
at the base of it?
>>SCOTT: Very possibly.
And you know, it's actually in
the scientific research now,
leaky gut.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: Whereas, 10
years ago in my world,
we'd use the term leaky gut.
But now, there's
research saying,
yes, there is this
thing called leaky gut.
>>REGINA: Makes perfect sense.
>>SCOTT: So it's really exciting
that the medical community
is embracing this.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it
does make sense.
If you have all this stuff
leaking into your system,
you're going to create
antibodies for it.
That should tell you
right there on that panel.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>REGINA: Right?
Interesting.
OK.
So we had to address that.
Oh, before we go into chocolate,
what about low stomach acid?
How does that affect our
ability to digest the food
or assimilate the food?
Even if you are eating
all the right things,
if you don't have the proper
amount of stomach acid,
what does that mean?
>>SCOTT: Great question.
Because we need
good enzymes to be
able to get the benefits
of the nutrients
from these wonderful
foods that we're eating.
You know, we can be eating
the best foods in the world,
but if we're not
digesting them, we're
not going to get the benefits.
And hydrochloric
acid or stomach acid
is one particular thing that
helps us to digest food.
Actually, hydrochloric
acid or stomach acid
is used to break down protein.
So if we're going to eat this
beautiful grass-fed red meat
or this lovely wild fish, we
need the hydrochloric acid
or the stomach acid.
And that actually breaks down
the protein into amino acids.
It helps us get
access to iron, zinc,
and all these other
wonderful nutrients.
And we've found that
in a lot of people,
the hydrochloric acid production
actually goes down as they age.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: So they may need
a little bit of support,
adding in a leafy green
vegetable just before a meal,
like an arugula or something
bitter that can actually
stimulate your hydrochloric
acid production,
or having something like apple
cider vinegar, a little bit
in a glass of water
before a meal,
can actually stimulate your
own stomach acid production.
>>REGINA: What about
something simple
like over-the-counter
supplements
like papaya enzymes.
>>SCOTT: So those are different.
Those are great.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SCOTT: Those are
general enzymes
that'll help us break
down other foods.
>>REGINA: Oh, right.
That's not a hydrochloric acid.
Right.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
But we often need those as well.
So I'll often have people, if
they've got digestive issues,
add in a general
enzyme that contains
some of the papain
and the bromelain
and some of those
other enzymes together
with the hydrochloric acid.
And then they'll monitor
their stool and their bowel
movements.
And we'll see improvements.
And then we know we're
on to the right thing.
>>REGINA: If the
apple cider vinegar
and the arugula and
astringent leafy greens
aren't doing the
trick, are there
any other hydrochloric
acid type of supplements?
>>SCOTT: You can take straight
hydrochloric acid supplement.
>>REGINA: Is that
over-the-counter?
>>SCOTT: Over-the-counter.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SCOTT: And the way to do it is
to start off with one per meal
and build up to five per meal.
And when you get that
sort of burning sensation
in the sort of stomach here,
like a hot potato feeling,
that means you've
taken too many.
And then you back down.
So say you got to
two or three per meal
and you got that warm sensation,
then you back down to two.
And then you take two per meal.
And that's going to be your
level of hydrochloric acid
that you need.
And eventually, you'll
start to make your own.
And then you can back down even
further, and maybe even stop.
>>REGINA: You will
start to make your own?
So this is not irreversible.
It's not necessarily a
natural process of aging.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SCOTT: The other thing is
we need salt in our diets.
We need salt to make
hydrochloric acid.
And a lot of people are going on
completely low salt or no salt
diets.
We need quality salt.
So it needs to be
Celtic salt or sea salt.
And it's got the minerals.
And it's a good source of
salt without all the added
things that we
don't really want.
>>REGINA: How about the
pink Himalayan salt?
>>SCOTT: Perfect, love it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I like that one.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: I just ordered
a couple pounds of it.
>>SCOTT: Great.
>>REGINA: I like
that in my food.
OK.
Now, we're going on to
one that a lot of people
have attachment
issues regarding.
We're talking about chocolate.
And when we talked off camera,
Jay, who's in the studio here,
said please don't
tell me you're going
to say chocolate's on the list.
But the good thing
is Jay doesn't
have any mood disorders.
So again, we have to
keep this specific.
If you don't have
a mood disorder,
this isn't the conversation
that you have to worry about.
But if you do, let's talk about
the effects of theobromine
and chocolate with the caffeine
and everything else in it.
>>SCOTT: Chocolate
does make us feel good.
You know, we know
it affects our mood.
We know it gives us
this comfort feeling.
A lot of women really
love chocolate.
And every time I go
into a presentation,
someone will come to me at the
beginning of the presentation
and say, we are going to talk
about chocolate, aren't we?
You know, it's a
really hot topic.
>>REGINA: Thinking, yes.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
Are you sure it's OK
or if it's not OK?
And they often know that
it is an issue for them.
But the issue with the chocolate
is the high sugar content,
which if it's white
chocolate or milk chocolate,
it's high sugar.
Caffeine is a big factor.
And for some people
with anxiety,
the effects of the caffeine in
chocolate can just be too much.
You know, there's a lot
of research supporting
that it's beneficial
for heart disease.
It helps lower high
blood pressure.
It helps with lipids.
So there are some good
benefits with chocolate.
The problem is three things.
Quality, again,
is very important.
Cocoa beans are
very highly sprayed.
So it definitely does
need to be organic.
And then the darker
chocolate is better.
The problem with the darker
chocolate, it's got less sugar,
but's got more caffeine.
>>REGINA: More caffeine, yeah.
>>SCOTT: So that's
an issue, too.
And the final thing is can you
have one piece or two pieces?
Or do you need to
demolish the whole slab
and you're using it
for emotional reasons?
Is it a comfort thing?
Is it giving you energy?
Do you need it at
the end of the day
to give you that mood boost?
If you're using it
like a drug, it's
your drug of choice
to make you feel good,
then you need to address where
the biochemical imbalance is
and then address that.
>>REGINA: And
otherwise, if you don't
have mood disorders,
moderation's fine on chocolate.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: So that's
the good news
for people who are not suffering
from anxiety or depression.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's
talk about coffee.
Now, that might even be more
of a sacred cow for most people
than chocolate.
>>SCOTT: It is.
>>REGINA: I mean, because that's
the ritual to start the day.
>>SCOTT: It is.
And that is the thing
that most of my clients
have the biggest issue with.
They'll give up sodas.
They'll even give up chocolate.
They'll add in red meat.
They'll do all
these other things.
They're willing to give
up cookies and bread.
But the coffee is something
they really hold on to.
As you said, it's this ritual.
I had one of my
clients say, it's
my quite time in the morning.
When there's no one else
around, I make my cup of coffee.
And I sit there, and
I watch the sunrise.
And I'm getting my books done.
And I'm getting things done.
And if you take that away from
me, what am I going to have?
The problem is with coffee,
again, is the caffeine.
And there's research showing--
there's one study that actually
showed a group of women who had
anxiety that hadn't benefited
from medication, they hadn't
benefited from therapy.
They were only
drinking one and a half
to three cups of coffee a day.
They took the coffee
out, anxiety was gone.
So it really is worth doing.
Before you think about
adding in supplements
of doing all this testing,
just think about getting off
the coffee and see how you feel.
Now, we can't just yank the
coffee away for a lot of people
because a lot of
people are using coffee
to give them energy.
They may not be
getting enough sleep.
They may have adrenal fatigue.
They may have thyroid problems.
And they're using that
coffee to give them energy.
So if they take that coffee
away and they can't function,
then that's no good.
So we need to take a
look at the underlying
reason of why they
drink the coffee.
The great thing is all my
clients who have eventually
gone caffeine-free
say, I can't believe
I fought you so much on this.
It's not that bad.
I'm feeling great without it.
And I can't believe I
made such an issue of it.
>>REGINA: But what about some
of the coffee substitutes?
I mean, the woman-- I've
forgotten her name right
off hand-- who started
Teeccino, who was formerly
one of the formulators for
Celestial Seasonings started
Teeccino, which is
chicory-based and so forth.
And it does have a
coffee flavor to it.
It's different, but it doesn't
have the caffeine for one.
And it still has that
full bodied flavor.
And I'm not
advertising Teeccino.
There are other
companies as well.
What about those?
>>SCOTT: Those are great.
Some of them do contain barley.
So you've got to be aware
if gluten is an issue.
>>REGINA: Then you're
into the gluten issue.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
But one of my
favorites is actually
Dandy Blend, which is
made with dandelions.
And it's got this
rich bodied flavor
that you're talking about.
>>REGINA: Does it
taste like coffee?
>>SCOTT: It tastes like warm--
I'm not a coffee drinker.
So I'd hate to say that
it tastes like coffee.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>SCOTT: But my
clients enjoy it.
And I have a little
sample in my office.
And I give them a sample to try.
>>REGINA: What is
it called Dandy--
>>SCOTT: Dandy Blend.
And it's made from
dandelions, and dandelions
are supportive of the liver.
So you're getting that
coffee kind of taste.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
Because the caffeine is
actually damaging on the liver.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
And a lot of women with
hormonal issues and men
need liver support.
You support the liver, and that
helps with hormonal imbalance.
So getting that liver
support is fabulous.
And let me give you one more
other drink instead of coffee.
Carob is one of my favorites.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
>>SCOTT: Carob in hot water with
a little bit of coconut milk
or fresh cream with a little
bit of cinnamon in it.
And it's just delicious.
>>REGINA: OK.
All right.
I'll try that one.
>>SCOTT: OK, good.
>>REGINA: You were talking
about adrenal burnout.
And we were talking
about coffee, caffeine.
That also gets into
the weight gain issue.
I noticed that of all
the diets out there,
the myriad number of diets,
almost all of them have people,
for weight loss,
almost all of them
have them give up
coffee or caffeine.
Yes.
And there's research
showing that it
affects cortisol levels.
It affects testosterone levels.
It affects your estrogen levels.
So it does effect different
parts of the body.
We know from research that it
does deplete us of nutrients.
It's very dehydrating as well.
So there's a lot of
elements as to why
we might want to give up coffee.
And I even say to those clients
who do not have anxiety,
I challenge you to give up
coffee and see how you feel.
Because if you remove it
and now you can't function,
then that's a clue
that there's something
underlying that you
need to address.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK.
>>SCOTT: So even the
people who aren't anxious,
you need to think about.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Well, and also I
can't help but think
it's because like gluten
and everything else,
a lot of the processed foods
that have gluten in them
have percentages
up to 20%, 30%, 40%
gluten in some of these
very refined baked goods.
Versus, natural hard wheats and
such of earlier times and that
still exist, heirloom
wheats and grains,
which have maybe 2% naturally.
>>SCOTT: Aboslutely.
>>REGINA: But they
throw the gluten in
to make this light
fluffy texture.
So we've been over
consuming gluten
to the point where
we can certainly
understand on that, for example,
why we've become intolerant.
But what about
coffee, when you go
in for a venti in
the morning, versus
when you're in Eastern
Europe, or when
you're in any of the Arabian
countries, any of the--
>>SCOTT: Yeah, a
tiny little thing.
>>REGINA: --Middle
Eastern countries, you're
having this much
in a cup that big.
>>SCOTT: And it's black--
>>REGINA: And it's black.
>>SCOTT: --without sugar.
>>REGINA: Maybe a little
cardamom in there--
>>SCOTT: Yes, exactly.
>>REGINA: --in some of
the Arab traditions.
>>SCOTT: So you'll see a
lot of research showing
benefits of coffee.
And the latest research
seems to support black coffee
with no sugar, no creamer.
The other thing with
coffee, also coffee beans
are highly sprayed, very,
very highly sprayed.
>>REGINA: So the organic thing
is really really important.
>>SCOTT: So it
should be organic.
And it should be in a ceramic
mug not a plastic mug.
Because otherwise, you're
getting all the plastics out
of the mug, out of
the plastic mug.
>>REGINA: One of
the things I did,
I bought one of those little
stove top Italian espresso
makers.
>>SCOTT: Excellent.
>>REGINA: So it
forces the steam up.
So it's a tabletop version of
what you get in the stores.
>>SCOTT: Great.
>>REGINA: But again,
just a tiny little bit
like that, it's almost like
a homeopathic dose of coffee.
It actually feels pretty
good without the same kind
of reactions as having, say, a
latte or something like that.
So then, again,
you're talking dairy,
when you start throwing
all the dairy in.
>>SCOTT: Or soy.
A lot of people are adding
soy to their lattes.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SCOTT: And that
can be a whole issue.
Certainly, any soy that
is consumed definitely
needs to be organic.
Because if it's not,
we can be assured
it is genetically modified.
Because 90% of the soy in
this country that is not
organic is genetically modified.
And we really don't want to
be adding that to the mix.
>>REGINA: No.
And what about dairy?
How does diary factor in?
Is that part of the profile?
>>SCOTT: Well, some people
have a problem with dairy.
And it might be a
short term thing
while they're healing the gut
if they've got a gluten issue.
And then there's
different forms of dairy.
Some people can
tolerate cow's milk.
Some will do better on
sheep's milk or goat's milk.
Some will do better with
yogurt or fermented dairy.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>SCOTT: So it
really is a matter
of figuring out what works.
>>REGINA: But that's
not as big a part
of this story as
the chocolate, which
has the caffeine, and then the
coffee, which has the caffeine.
And now we go to
the big one, sugar.
Sugar.
>>SCOTT: So sugar is toxic.
And there was a paper published
last year in "Nature,"
by Robert Lustig.
And he said sugar
is toxic, and it
should be banned and controlled
like tobacco and alcohol.
>>REGINA: Instead, when you
check out at the grocery store,
there it is--
>>SCOTT: It's right there.
>>REGINA: --with all of
it's pretty little packaging
and colors, beckoning us.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
And, you know, I disagree.
I totally with part
of that statement.
I totally agree with
that it is toxic.
It really is toxic.
We should not have any
added sugar in our diets.
The desire for something sweet
should be satisfied by fruit.
So I agree with that
part, the toxic part.
What I don't agree
with is that it
should be banned and controlled.
Because we
self-medicate with sugar
like we self-medicate with
coffee and with other treats.
And if we yank it away
and we control it,
people are going
to feel deprived.
They're going to
feel more depressed.
What we need to do is
balance brain chemistry.
If we address
nutritional deficiencies,
we balance brain chemistry, we
address these neurotransmitter
imbalances, then the desire
for sugar just goes away.
And it becomes a non-issue.
There's no will power required.
And people don't feel deprived.
And that's what we want.
We want balance.
>>REGINA: Are you
saying all sugars?
Or what about, say, a
raw honey, for example,
a regional raw honey, which
does have other nutrients in it.
>>SCOTT: Absolutely.
Stevia and xylitol do not
affect blood sugar levels.
So those are OK in
the transition period.
But it's just when
we're replacing sugar
with equal amounts of honey
or sugar with agave nectar--
and agave nectars
are not a good thing.
It used to be considered
a healthy sweetener.
There's no such thing as a
healthy sweetener really.
But agave nectar, people are
using it in large quantities.
And it's still sugar.
It's actually fructose.
And there's research showing
that fructose and heart
disease are definitely related.
>>REGINA: So let's
throw in the subject
of other natural sources like
raisins, dates, and dried
fruits.
How do those affect us in
terms of mood disorder?
>>SCOTT: So those are great
because fruits is good.
But keep in mind you would
eat way more raisins than you
would eat in a bunch of grapes.
So the problem is you may
eat a whole bag, which
is going to be way more.
So dried fruit in
moderation because you
can tend to eat more
of it, and it is higher
concentration of sugars.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>SCOTT: But it's a great snack.
And the thing is with
sugar is to have something
with the sugar so you're
not getting that sugar high.
>>REGINA: Well, like, if you
had dates and nuts together,
for example.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
Perfect.
>>REGINA: That would
be a nice-- yeah.
>>SCOTT: A handful of nuts
and some dates would be great.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, we're going to get
to the really juicy part
of the conversation as
far as I'm concerned.
And that has to do
with the amino acids.
Because you and the
work you've done
with people has been
really pretty extraordinary
in some of the results.
So we have about 10 minutes.
We can really dive
into it a bit.
>>SCOTT: OK.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about the amino acids
that are, for example,
implicated in our sugar
cravings, since we're
following that subject.
>>SCOTT: OK.
I use five different amino
acids in my practice.
And we determine
which one to use
based on the person's symptoms.
So I'll have people do
these questionnaires
where we'll look at serotonin.
We'll look at the
catecholamines.
We'll look at gaba.
We'll look at the endorphins.
And we'll look at blood sugar.
And depending on how they
score on their symptoms,
we'll then decide which
amino acid to use.
And I'll use them in
the office with someone.
So say you, my
client, you score high
in the low serotonin section.
So you're depressed,
like a 10 out of 10.
You've got sleep
problems, 9 out of 10.
You've got anxiety and
worry, like 8 out of 10.
And you've got these afternoon
and evening cravings.
That's the clue for
the low serotonin.
You may have irritability.
You may have anger issues.
You may have PMS.
These are all signs
of low serotonin.
So you score high in that area.
So we think, OK, we want to
have you try the tryptophan.
This is the main amino acid
that I use for low serotonin.
And so I will say to you, how
are you feeling right now?
How's your anxiety level?
And you'll say it's like a 10.
And I've got this
worry in my head.
I can't stop thinking about
this thing that went on at work.
And I'm feeling
pretty depressed.
But I'm getting a
little bit optimistic,
because I'm here talking to you.
But my depression's, not
at 10, it's like an 8.
And it's afternoon,
how are your cravings?
Oh, I just really want
something sweet now.
So I'll say, well, let's
have you try tryptophan.
So I'll give you the tryptophan.
And it's sublingual.
So you will just chew it.
And the reason we do
the chewing is then it
gets in through the blood
vessels and into your brain
quickly.
And we can get a
result very quickly.
And then I will ask you
in five minutes time,
so how are you feeling?
How's that worry feeling?
Hm, it's gone from an eight
to a nine to like a five.
I feel relaxed.
I feel more optimistic.
Yes, I feel happier.
And I say, what
about the craving?
Oh, I hadn't even
thought about it.
And it works that quickly.
So the wonderful thing
with the amino acids
is they work so
quickly that you will
know if they're going
to have an effect.
If you don't notice
anything, it may
be that you didn't
have quite enough.
Or it may be that
you don't need it.
And if you don't need it, then
we move on to something else.
And then I do the same with
all the different sections.
Low gaba would be
stiff and tense muscles
and feeling sort of
physically tense.
And we'll have someone try
the gaba and see the results.
Now, I had one little
girl come in the office.
She had bad anger issues,
bad sleep problems,
very depressed, and
very big sugar cravings.
She loved the candies, all
the brightly colored candies.
And she came into the office.
And they didn't
have a lot of money.
And so I had to pick
three or four things
that I knew were really going
to possibly get us some results.
I had blood work done.
She had low iron.
And it turned out that
she had gluten issues.
So we got her off gluten.
And that made a big difference.
But the thing that
was key for her
was adding in the tryptophan.
She was in the office, and we
were talking about her mood
and talking about
her sugar cravings.
And I said to her we
might have to have
you give up sugar,
give up the candies.
And she was very upset.
She was in a swivel chair.
And she swiveled herself
around so her back was to me.
And she wouldn't talk to me.
So I said to her
don't worry about it.
Just tell me how
you feel right now.
She said I'm angry and
I'm anxious that you're
going to take away my candies.
And she didn't understand
the scale of 1 to 10.
So we worked it out that it was
at the top end of the scale.
And I gave her a
chewable tryptophan.
And I carried on
talking to her mother.
And five minutes later,
she turned around,
and she smiled at
me, and she said,
I'm ready to give up my candy.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>SCOTT: That quickly.
And I work with women, mostly
adult women, and a lot of women
will say to me, is
this really happening?
Is this a placebo effect?
Could it really
happen that quickly?
And they're often sort of
second guessing themselves,
but when you see that happen
in a 10-year-old child,
it's just so powerful.
She has no idea what
she's been given.
But she feels good.
End of the story was anger
issues gone, sleep completely
resolved, and a new child,
and no sugar cravings.
>>REGINA: OK.
You're working with
these clients directly.
But if someone were not working
with you, is there a way,
are there self-tests and
such so they can find out
which of these
particular amino acids
they might be deficient in?
>>SCOTT: So there
are questionnaires.
And all the questionnaires
are in my book.
So people can take the
questionaires, complete them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It's very nicely laid
out, very easy to use.
>>SCOTT: Thank you.
And they can just
follow those through.
And if they're going
to do it on their own,
I would encourage them
to try one at a time,
so they can see what
the results are.
And just go through
the questionnaires.
Score it.
Try it.
And then see what
the results are.
And if it's not working, then
move onto the next thing.
And I work with
people in the office.
I work with people
over the phone.
When I'm working with
people long distance,
I've got clients
all over the world,
I just send them a little
package of all the amino acids.
And we do the trial
over the phone as well.
So it works equally well if--
>>REGINA: So within
five minutes you
can usually get a read on
most of the amino acids.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
And then you know if
that's going to work.
And then based on
how much I gave them,
we know how many they need.
Because some people are what
we called pixie dust people.
I had a-- my colleague Carla
at the recovery systems clinic
used to call them pixie
dust people, which
means they need a
very small amount.
And they would actually open
up a capsule and just do that.
And that's how much they needed.
Where some people
will need a whole
capsule, or they may
need two or three.
>>REGINA: So what are the
others besides tryptophan,
which is turkey?
Doesn't that contain tryptophan?
>>SCOTT: It does.
The problem is if
you eat turkey,
you're getting all
the other amino acids.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SCOTT: So you need
it taken individually.
And I do want to just say
that the amino acids need
to be taken between meals.
So if you have breakfast,
you would have an amino acid.
Then you'd have
lunch, then you'd
have an amino acid, and
then dinner and so forth.
Because then it's not
competing for absorption
with the other proteins.
>>REGINA: OK.
So you said there were four,
so what are the other three?
>>SCOTT: So for serotonin,
it's tryptophan.
And then 5-HTP is
often used as well.
I just find most of my clients
do better on tryptophan.
So I usually start
with tryptophan.
For the low
catecholamines, which
is using food and sugar
for energy, it's tyrosine.
For low gaba, which is the stiff
and tense muscles, it's gaba.
Gaba's the amino acid
and the neurotransmitter.
And then for the low
endorphins-- and this
is when someone loves chocolate.
I just love chocolate.
Or I love chocolate
chip cookies.
And they've got this
little tear in their eye
when you say you might
have to give it up.
And they do the DPA,
which is diphenylamine-
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SCOTT: --that is the one
that raises endorphine levels.
And then they feel
comfort, and then they
don't need the chocolate or
this thing that they love.
>>REGINA: Absolutely fabulous.
>>SCOTT: And then the
final one is glutamine.
>>REGINA: Glutamine, right.
>>SCOTT: So glutamine
helps with low blood sugar.
And we need good
stable blood sugar.
If we've got these ups and
downs throughout the day,
we're going to feel
anxious, irritable, edgy.
Glutamine is wonderful for
stabilizing the blood sugar.
>>REGINA: It also
helps with leaky gut.
>>SCOTT: Perfect.
Wonderful for healing the gut.
>>REGINA: I starting taking
that a few months ago.
I love it.
>>SCOTT: Wonderful.
>>REGINA: And it does
make any difference
in terms of appetite and sugars.
I'm a sugar baby.
I like just a little
bit here and there.
But so there will be times
really earlier in the day
until late in the evening
where I'm actually
repulsed by the
thought of eating sugar
when I'm taking the glutamine.
So I can say myself that
that has worked well for me.
>>SCOTT: Great.
>>REGINA: So meanwhile, thank
you for writing your book.
People can get an awful
lot of help out of it
without even having
to contact you.
>>SCOTT: Well, thank you.
>>REGINA: Although, they
can if they want to.
So thank you so much
for joining us, Trudy.
If you're inspired to
tackle your depression
by natural means, Trudy's
book, "The Anti-Anxiety Food
Solution," is
available via Amazon
and other online booksellers.
It offers very practical
and easily laid out
set of protocols
to help you back
into your natural
sunny disposition.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]